R code for Þtting Multimix Murray A. Jorgensen Auckland University of Technology New Zealand majmurr@gmail.com January 12, 2019 1 This document This document is intended to serve two purposes. While the R version of Multimix is under development it will describe the R objects and scripts used in this project for my beneÞt whenever I need a refresher and for the beneÞt of anyone else who may be interested, particularly possible contributors. Later the document will form part of the package documentation, probably after further editing. 2 The Byar and Green Prostate Cancer data In order to be able to give concrete examples of the data structures that we will be introducing we consider the clustering of patients on the basis of pre-trial variables alone for the Prostate Cancer clinical trial data of Byar and Green (1980) reproduced in Andrews and Herzberg (1985, pp 261Ð 247). This data was obtained from a randomized clinical trial comparing four treatments for 506 patients with prostatic cancer. These patients had been grouped by physicians using clinical criteria into Stage 3 and Stage 4 of the disease. Patients were classiÞed as having Stage 3 prostatic cancer when the cancer was contained locally and there was no clinical evidence that the disease had spread elsewhere, whilst they were classiÞed as having Stage 4 prostatic cancer when there was evidence that the disease had spread to other parts of the body. This evidence could have been obtained from elevated acid phosphatase levels, x-rays, or both of these. Byar and Green (1980) originally considered this data in their investigation to determine whether there may be an optimal treatment for each patient based on his individual characteristics. They approached this question by looking for treatment-covariate interactions in an exponential survival model. They found that younger patients with high grade tumours should have been treated with estrogens, whereas older patients with low grade tumours were likely to be harmed by estrogen treatment. There are twelve pre-trial covariates measured on each patient, seven may be taken to be continuous, four to be discrete, and one variable (SG) is an index nearly all of whose values lie between 7 and 15, and which could be considered either discrete or continuous. We will treat SG as a continuous variable. Table 1: Variables in dataset Variable  Abbreviation  No. of Levels  Age Weight Performance rating Cardiovascular disease history Systolic Blood pressure Diastolic blood pressure Electrocardiogram code Serum haemoglobin Size of primary tumour Index of tumour stage and histolic grade Serum prostatic acid phosphatase Bone metastases  Age Wt PF HX SBP DBP EKG HG SZ SG AP BM  4 2 7 2  A preliminary inspection of the data showed that the size of the primary tumour (SZ) and serum prostatic acid phosphatase (AP) were both skewed variables. These variables have therefore been transformed. A square root transformation was used for SZ, and a logarithmic transformation was used for AP to achieve approximate normality. (As for correlation, skewness over the whole data set does not necessarily mean skewness within clusters but when clusters were formed within-cluster skewness was observed for these variables.) Observations that had missing values in any of the twelve pre.treatment covariates were omitted from further analysis, leaving 475 out of the original 506 observations available. 3 User inputs These objects should be created by the user. (In some early versions of Setup.r, then known as Noniter.r, they are created within that script.) p is a scalar giving the number of variables to be modeled. dframe is a data frame containing the p variables to be modeled. Variables to be modeled as continuous should be vectors, variables to be modeled as discrete should be factors. Other columns may be present but the variables to be modeled should be the leftmost p columns. There are no other constraints on the order of the columns. No missing values may occur among the variables to be modeled. It is recommended that continuous variables be standardized so as to mostly lie within the interval (.3, 3) as conventional identities for sums of squares and products are employed in the present version of the scripts and can give numerical di.culties with unstandardized data. (It is intended that later versions will remove the necessity to standardize.) cdep is a list of vectors. Each vector is a set of positions of columns of dframe[,1:p] that may be dependent in a mixture component. All columns must be continuous variables. The sets must be disjoint. lcdep is a list of vectors. Each vector is a set of positions of columns of dframe[,1:p] that may be dependent in a mixture component and which make up the variables of a location model. The Þrst element in each vector corresponds to the discrete variable of the location model, the remaining ³ 1 elements correspond to the continuous variables. The sets must be disjoint. Z is an n . q matrix, where n is the number of rows of dframe and q is the number of components in the mixture. During the Þtting Zij holds the currently estimated probability that observation i belongs to compo.nent j. Commonly Z is initialized to a matrix of indicator columns for a partition of the data. W is an n . q matrix, based on Z but with each column multiplied by a constant so as to sum to 1 over rows. The objects dframe[,1:p], cdep, lcdep and Z deÞne the data and the form of each mixture component model. The script DataModelZ.r is an example of an R script specifying the user inputs. It loads the R workspace Þle cancer.RData which contains a pre-processed version of the Byar-Green Prostate Cancer data. The script cancer.r shows how this workspace was created. We may refer to this example later in this document. Note that to keep the code completely general subsequent scripts do not refer to any user-deÞned objects other than dframe[,1:p], cdep, lcdep and Z. 4 Setup.r This script contains code that is not intended to be iterated. Whenever pos.sible objects are created and given values here rather than in an iteration step in order to reduce the execution time of code which is executed repeatedly. We now discuss the main objects in the code in several groups. 4.1 Functions of data Setup.r organizes the data in dframe into new structures such as lists of matrices, depending on the model being Þtted. Similarly some functions of the data are also stored in this way. We have need to store cross-products of variables. Because we have chosen to store these in matrices rather than higher order arrays we introduce a pairing function to give an integer index to an pair of unequal integers where the smaller integer is on the left. The function pair.index:(u, v) 7. N is such a function and the functions left:N 7. u and right:N 7. v jointly provide an inverse. The function deÞnitions in the script do not give a clear idea of how the pairs of variables are ordered but Figure 1 should illustrate how the o.-diagonal integer pairs are ordered. Also included in the script are functions Pair.Index, Left and Right which do a similar job when both members of a pair may be the same as when squares are included along with products. I donÕt need these functions at the moment but you never know when they might come in handy! Figure 1: The pairing function pair.index orders pairs as shown. dvals is a list of matrices for each discrete variable not included in a location model. The matrix for each discrete variable is made up of an indicator column of length n for each level (value) of the variable. A general value of dvals has the form dvals[[vbl]][obs, level] andis 1i. discrete variable vbl takes level level for observation obs. In the cancer example of section 3 dvals is a list of two matrices: a 475 . 2 matrix and a 475 . 6 matrix corresponding to the variables CVD and EKG respectively. ldvals is a list of matrices for each discrete variable within a location model. The matrix for each discrete variable is made up of an indicator col.umn of length n for each level (value) of the variable. A general value of ldvals has the form ldvals[[vbl]][obs, level]. In the cancer example of section 3 ldvals is a list of two matrices: a 475 . 2 ma.trix and a 475 . 3 matrix corresponding to the variables BM and Perf respectively. ovals is the matrix of continuous variables that are outside any location model, and not associated with any other continuous variable in the model. In the cancer example ovals is a 475 . 3 matrix with the variables Size, Index, and PAP as columns. ovals2 holds the squares of the elements of ovals. cvals is a list with a member for each fully continuous partition cell (that is a cell not including discrete cells or cells listed in lcdep) each member being the matrix of continuous variables in that cell. A general value of cvals has the form cvals[[cell]][obs, vbl]. In the cancer example there is only a single multivariate normal cell and cvals is a list with one member, a 475 . 2 matrix with the variables SBP and DBP as columns. cvals2 As for cvals, but the data is squared. lcvals is a list with a member for each location partition cell, each member being the matrix of continuous variables in that cell. A general value of lcvals has the form lcvals[[cell]][obs, vbl]. In the cancer example lcvals is a list of two matrices: a 475 . 2 matrix with the variables Weight and Haem as columns and a 475 . 1 matrix with the variable Age as its column. lcvals2 As for lcvals, but the data is squared. cprods is a list with a member for each fully continuous partition cell con.taining at least two variables, each member being the matrix of pair.wise products of the continuous variables in that cell, as ordered by pair.index. A general value of cprods has the form cprods[[cell]][obs, pair.index(vbl1, vbl2)]. In the cancer ex.ample cprods is a list with a single member, that being a a 475 . 1 matrix with the products of SBP and DBP as its column. lcprods is a list with a member for each location partition cell, each member being the matrix of pairwise products of the continuous variables in that cell, as ordered by pair.index. A general value of lcprods has the form lcprods[[cell]][obs, pair.index(vbl1, vbl2)]. In the cancer example lcprods is a list with two members, a 475 . 1 matrix with the products of Weight and Haem as its column and a 475 . 0 matrix, there being only a single continuous variable in the second location model cell. For the consistency of the code it is necessary to admit degenerate matrices such as lcprods[[2]] in this example. ldxc is a list with a member for each location partition cell, each member being a list with a member for each level of the cellÕs discrete variable that member being a matrix of the products of the levelÕs indicator with the continuous variables of the model. A general value of ldxc has the form ldxc[[cell]][[level]][obs, vbl]. In the cancer example ldxc is a list of two lists: ldxc[[1]] has a member for each of the two levels of BM, each member formed as the pointwise product of of the indicator variable for its level with the 475 . 2 matrix with the variables Weight and Haem as columns; ldxc[[2]] has a member for each of the three levels of Perf, each member formed as the pointwise product of of the indicator variable for its level with the 475 . 1 matrix with the variable Age. 4.2 Setting up structures for storing statistics The structures in the previous section are built from the columns of the n . p data frame dframe[, 1:p]. The structures to be described now are related to these but the n rows are now replaced by q rows. These rows are formed by weighted averaging over the observation values where the weights are appropriate columns of the matrix Z, This averaging takes place in the E-step module Estep.r and all that Setup.r does is to create dummy lists of the appropriate length. Just the same we will describe the intended use of these objects now. dstat is a list of matrices for each discrete variable not included in a location model. The matrix for each discrete variable is made up of a column of length q for each level (value) of the variable giving the expected proportion of each level (column) for each mixture component (row). Rows sum to 1. ldstat is a list of matrices for each discrete variable within a location model. The matrix for each discrete variable is made up of a column of length q for each level (value) of the variable giving the expected proportion of each level (column) for each mixture component (row). Rows sum to 1. ostat is the matrix with a column for each continuous variable outside any location mode whose q rows give the current estimated mean for each mixture component. ostat2 is the matrix with a column for each continuous variable outside any location mode whose q rows give the current estimated mean square for each mixture component. osvar is the matrix with a column for each continuous variable outside any location mode whose q rows give the current estimated variance for each mixture component. cstat is a list with a member for each nontrivial, fully continuous, partition cell, that is not including discrete cells or cells listed in lcdep, each member being a matrix with a column for each continuous variable in that cell, whose q rows give the current estimated mean for each mixture component. cstat2 is a list with a member for each nontrivial, fully continuous, partition cell, each member being a matrix with a column for each continuous variable in that cell, whose q rows give the current estimated mean square for each mixture component. cvar is a list with a member for each nontrivial, fully continuous, partition cell, each member being a matrix with a column for each continuous variable in that cell, whose q rows give the current estimated variance for each mixture component. cpstat is a list with a member for each nontrivial, fully continuous, partition cell, each member being the matrix with rows for each of the q mixture components and columns for each pair of continuous variables in that cell, as ordered by pair.index. The matrix elements are the currently expected products of the variable pairs arranged by component and pair. ccov is a list with a member for each nontrivial, fully continuous, partition cell, each member being the matrix with rows for each of the q mixture components and columns for each pair of continuous variables in that cell, as ordered by pair.index. The matrix elements are the currently expected covariances of the variable pairs arranged by component and pair. MVMV is a list with a member for each nontrivial, fully continuous, par.tition cell, each member being a list with members for each of the q mixture components whose values are the covariance matrix estimates for that cell and component. lcstat is a list with a member for location partition cell, each member being a matrix with a column for each continuous variable in that cell, whose q rows give the current estimated mean for each mixture component. lcstat2 is a list with a member for location partition cell, each member being a matrix with a column for each continuous variable in that cell, whose q rows give the current estimated mean square for each mixture component. lcpstat is a list with a member for each location cell, each member being the matrix with rows for each of the q mixture components and columns for each pair of continuous variables in that cell, as ordered by pair.index. The matrix elements are the currently expected products of the variable pairs arranged by component and pair. lccov is a list with a member for each location cell, each member being the matrix with rows for each of the q mixture components and columns for each pair of continuous variables in that cell, as ordered by pair.index. The matrix elements are the currently estimated covariances of the variable pairs arranged by component and pair. ldxcstat is a list with a member for each location partition cell, each member being a list with a member for each level of the cellÕs discrete variable that member being a matrix of mean values of the continuous variables for each level-class combination. 5 Estep.r This script implements the E-step of the EM algorithm for the Multimix model. In other words it calculates the structures holding the complete-data su.cient statistics by forming expectations, these being weighted means of the data with respect to the weights in the columns of W . Notice the major use of the matrix function crossprod() which is an e.ciently implemented internal function of R. 6 Mstep.r After the execution of the E-step we have the expectations of the complete-data su.cient statistics. The maximum likelihood estimates in the complete-data problem are functions of the su.cient statistics; the EM-updated pa.rameter estimates are the same function of the expected complete-data suf.Þcient statistics. 7 likcalc.r The purpose of this script is to calculate the matrices Z and W from the current parameter estimates and the data. It could be merged with either Estep.r or Mstep.r but I choose to keep it separate. We should normally use these scripts in the sequence Mstep.r . likcalc.r . Estep.r be.cause likcalc.r needs the parameter estimates calculated in Mstep.r and Estep.r needs W , which is calculated in likcalc.r. Appendix: Maximum Likelihood Estimation in the Location Model Because the Location Model of Olkin and Tate [1961] may not be familiar to the reader we review ML estimation in this model. The location model is a probability distribution for p + 1 random variables, 1 discrete and p continuous. The discrete variable takes values .1,...,.k with probabilities ¹1,...,¹k. It is convenient to specify the discrete variable via k indicator variables x = x1,...,xk such that xij = 1 if the discrete part of the ith observation has value .j and is zero otherwise. We denote the p continuous variables by y = y1,...,yp. The Location model is speciÞed by requiring that the conditional distribution of y|x is Multivariate Normal: y|x = ej . Np(µj, .), where ej is the vector whose only nonzero element is 1 in position j, j = 1,...,k. Thus the parameters of the Location model are k scalars ¹1,...,¹k, con-Pkstrained to be non-negative and such that j=1 ¹j = 1, k vectors µj of length p and a symmetric, positive-deÞnite p . p matrix .. Consider now the maximum likelihood estimation of ¹1,...,¹k and µ1,..., µk from data (xi, yi), i =1,...,n, for the moment assuming that . is known. n.To avoid confusionbetween ¹ thefactor(2¹)2s is omitted from the likeli.hood L.. nk  YY xij1 |.|.1 2(yi . µj)0..1(yi . µj)L.(¹, µ)= ¹j exp . 2 i=1 j=1 Taking logs nk XXn 1 ` .(¹, µ)= . log(|.|)+ xij log(¹j) . (yi . µj)0..1(yi . µj)22 i=1 j=1 We may notice at Þrst that ` . separates into the sum of terms in ¹ and in µ which may be maximised separately. A simple Lagrange MultiplierP derivation shows that ¹öj = nj/n, j =1,...,k where nj = ni=1 xij. Secondly if we let Ij be the set of i such that xij = 1 then we may separate the part of ` . involving µ into k parts of form X . 1(yi . µj)0..1(yi . µj)2 i.Ij Again, the maximisation of these terms may be done separately, and the task is the same as that done required when Þnding the MLEs for the Multivariate Normal Distribution. A good reference for this is Mardia et al. [1979, Section 4.2.2.1]. We Þnd P n xijyi µöj = Pi=1 = yø jn i=1 xij for j =1,...,k. Now, allowing . to vary we may now form the proÞle log-likelihood for V =..1: nk XXn 1 ` p(V ) = log(|V |)+ xij . (yi . yø j)0V (yi . yø j)22 i=1 j=1 Pkomitting a constant term. Now ` p(V )= j=1 ` jp(V ) where X ` jp(V )= nj log(|V |)+ . 1(yi . yø j)0V (yi . yø j)22 i.Ij Now deÞne X Sj =1 (yi . yø j)0(yi . yø j), nj i.Ij for j =1,...,k. We may then write nj` jp(V ) = (log(|V |) . tr(VSj))2 [Mardia et al., 1979, Section 4.1.1]. Now ¶`jp(V ) nj= (2. . Diag. . 2Sj + DiagSj)¶V 2 and so X ¶`p(V ) n k n = (2. . Diag.). (2njSj . Diag(njSj))= 2. . Diag. . 2S÷ + DiagS÷ ¶V 22 j=1 where X XX S÷= 1 k njSj =1 nk xij(yi . yø j)0(yi . yø j). nn j=1 i=1 j=1 ÷This vanishes when and only when . = S, the ML estimate of . in the Location model. References K.V. Mardia, J.T. Kent, and J.M. Bibby. Multivariate Analysis. Academic Press, London, 1979. I. Olkin and R. F. Tate. Multivariate correlation models with mixed discrete and continuous variables. Ann. Math. Stat., 32:448Ð465, 1961. 